Imagining a life before cell phones is an extremely difficult task for most people in the world today. Cellular devices are so engrained into the everyday lives of people that most cant fathom how they could survive without them. In the early 1990’s cell phones were in use, but mostly used for business purposes.  Should a group of friends wish to take a road trip, they would have to make sure to stay jbryan@me.com very close so that their convoy didn’t get separated.  Lots of families had to stay close enough on the road so that their shortrange walkie-talkies could communicate when there was a need to stop for gas. Fast forward just a few short years and if you were to get separated on the highway, you can just dial the person’s number and let them know where you are.  alfred@yahoo.ca
With each passing year, cellular devices have become increasingly more complex and have begun to store more and more of our personal information. Each person’s cell phone now contains, contact information, birthdays, credit card information, personal emails, work location, home location, and you can even pinpoint where the phone is within just a few feet with the use of an internal GPS. Today, our cellular devices are far removed from the green screened “brick” style phones with a simple game of Snake on them. juerd@hotmail.com  The devices that we hold in our hands contain most of the information that makes up who we are.  
It is for these reasons that we must learn to protect these devices with whatever is at our disposal. The purpose of this research paper is  pemungkah@msn.com to teach cell phone users the dangers of unprotected information and how to combat all the threats that users are bombarded with daily. We will discuss current vulnerabilities, recent data breaches, future risks and negative impacts of an unprotected device and how we can avoid these challenges all together.  Although, these topics may seem to be doom and gloom, it is important to discuss these issues so that we can be prepared for the future.  Cell phones are not going away anytime soon, and it is time that we act now to protect what is the most important, our personal information.   
Digital thieves and attackers are very smart.  Not just smart from a technical standpoint, but smart in the sense that they excel finding the best market to tap into without fail. However, it doesn’t take a genius to see the wealth of opportunities that cellular devices give those who have bad intentions.  Currently, more than 80% of Americans own some type of smart cellular device (Pewinternet, 2019). With over 260,000 Americans owning a smart device, it is easy to see why so many attackers salivate at the chance to hack into our devices.  Millions of users, with millions of addresses, phone numbers, purchase histories, and credit card numbers going through the network at any given time.  There is always bound to be someone that is ripe for being taken advantage of.  
Although 260,000 different hacking opportunities sounds like a great pool to pick from, most attackers tend to filter through those users to find those who are the most vulnerable to attack. For example, when a lioness is hiding in the tall grass attempting to find her next meal, and she sees a heard of wildebeest, she will do all that she can to find the old and weak or the young and vulnerable.   The same method can apply to experienced mobile attackers.  If you were an attacker who had a choice between a twenty something college student who has had experience with technology for all their life, a pre-teen who just got their first iPhone, or an elderly person who has difficulty learning new technology, two options stand out immediately. Your odds of a successful attack increase when you are preying on the inexperienced and weak.   
As of 2017, approximately 70% of adults over the age of 50 owned some sort of smartphone.  (Anderson, p. 3) On the other end of the spectrum, about 95% of kids between the ages of thirteen and eighteen own a cell phone of their own or have access to a mobile device.  (Anderson, Jang , 2018) These numbers represent a huge target of vulnerable victims that are ripe for the theft of their (or their parent’s) personal information.
After an attacker has picked its prime target, the next step is to take advantage of any vulnerabilities that the user’s cell phone may have that can be exploited.  Paul Ruggiero and Jon Foote of The United States Security Emergency Preparedness Team mention in a government document that between 2009 and 2010 cell phone vulnerabilities increased 42%. (Foote, 2011) Although this data is from several years ago, one can imagine the exponential growth that cell phone vulnerabilities have had over the years.  Even though cell phones have become better and increasingly more advanced, these advancements also lead to new doors that can be opened by attackers.  
Unfortunately for users, it is not always an experienced hacker who is doing the most damage to us from our devices.  Even the most basic of attackers can easily create an application on a device that looks legitimate, however, will take control of your device when downloaded.  In a research study performed by Statista, it was found that over 12 billion applications were downloaded on devices in North America alone. Most cell phone users are fairly app hungry to say the least.  It is not often that when someone downloads an application on their device that they do their due diligence to make sure the application seems legitimate. Therefore, attackers’ easiest route to get to your personal information is just to trick you into downloading something on your own.  Think of how many children each day are given a cell phone at dinner or when they are trying to be occupied, only to have them download several applications that looked pretty on their parent’s device. 
Not only are we willingly downloading applications that can unwillingly provide access to our devices, but we are also connecting those same devices to unsecured wireless networks at alarming rates.  In a report performed by Symantec in 2016, they found that almost 90% of users who access public WIFI hotspots, access their personal email, and financial information while on the unsecured network.  Of those users, they also found that about 75% of them do not take advantage of the use of Virtual Private Networks. (Norton, 2016) 
Having access to free public WIFI is extremely important.  Our cell phones do not always have the best of signals when we are out and about cfhsoft@hotmail.com and being able to stop in a Starbucks to Facetime a relative or read a few emails feels like a  must have at times.  But is the risk of losing your personal information worth an hour of free WIFI? It is almost impossible to walk into a coffee shop these days without seeing a few entrepreneurs working on their next big thing, or a small company conducting an informal interview over a Carmel Macchiato. The question that we should be asking ourselves is, “How can I keep my information safe no matter where I am or what I am doing with my device?” 
Protection of your valuable personal information starts with taking the idea of mobile device protection seriously.  The devices that users hold in their hands may be able to play the latest games, but they are certainly not toyscmdrgravy@me.com. Cell phones are sophisticated pieces of technology that should be treated as such.  T that we hold are more advanced than even the space ships that put man on the moon, and one would be shocked if the space ships were treated as nonchalantly as we do our cell phones from a security standpoint. (Grossman, 2017)
One of the first steps that someone can take in protecting their device is by practicing good password hygiene.  It may not surprise a lot of people, because these are most likely the same passwords that they are using, but the most popular passwords from 2011 to 2015 were “password” and “123456”. (Fitzpatrick, 2016) How can anyone believe that they are seriously protecting any information with passwords such as these? Sometimes, we simply pick a password that is easy just because we are forced to do so.  Part of taking cell phone security seriously means to also take password protection seriously.  
One of the problems with creating passwords is that we have so many, and when you have created a strong password it is sometimes difficult to remember.  Chris Hoffman from How to Geek suggests using a method of password creation that prompts the user to choose four random words and put them together as one.  One of the examples that he uses for a strong password is “seashellglaringmolassesinvisible” These are four words that have absolutely nothing to do with each other, but they are easy to remember simply because of how ridiculous they are together.  The fact that the words have nothing in common and that the string of letters is so long is what makes it a powerful password because it would take years to simply guess with a password hacking algorithm. (Hoffman, 2018)
Having a secure password will certainly help if someone were to steal your device, but it will not necessarily help us from the risks that we put ourselves into daily.  As mentioned previously, one of the biggest risks that user encounter is that of public WIFI.  The fullest proof form of protection would be the public WIFI abstinence method, but who can resist the welcoming smell of coffee while perusing daily emails with free WIFI? Desire Athow from Techradar has some great advice for what is necessary to protect your information while surfing with your mobile devise on public WIFI: 
While there are several ways to protect yourself when using a Wi-Fi network, one way beats the rest – using a VPN. The most important thing you can do every time you connect is to use a VPN. A VPN encrypts your Internet connection to secure it and protect your privacy. When connecting with a VPN, no one – not the Internet service provider, the business/network owner nor any third-party hacker or snoop – can see the information you send over the network. When using Wi-Fi with a VPN your privacy and security is protected at all times. (Athow, 2017)  breegster@me.com
	A virtual private network is a vital way to protect your personal information when connecting to a network that is unsecure. A VPN will make it so that even if you choose to look at your bank account information at Starbucks (which you should not be doing), you will remain protected because others will not be able to see the information that is being transmitted.  It will make it more difficult to be subject to middle man and other attacks of that nature.  
	Overall, vigilance is key.  Early we discussed how easy it is for applications to trick users into providing their personal information by acting like legitimate website or applications.  One of the simplest ways to combat this is by not downloading applications that you are not familiar with, and even if you are, you should always look at the comments or reviews of an application.  Most of the time, if an application has a bad reputation there will be poor reviews or someone letting the other people know that this application does not do what it was intended to do.  Another great way to keep an eye on applications is to check the data usage on your device.  Most divides have a place that you can see which applications are using the most data from your phone.  If you look at this information and see a small game like for instance, Flappy Bird, using a disproportionate amount of data, then chances are it is transmitting information in the background and doing more than the application was intended to do.  You should delete these types of applications as soon as you are aware.  It is not always the case that these applications are bad, but is it worth taking the risk to fly a bird through a few pipes? 
	Technology is advancing at a blazing pace.  It is only fair to assume that in the future we will be even more dependent on our cell phones and the internet than we are today.  With 5G speeds on the horizon, information will be blazing fast. With this great increase in speed, will come a great increase in risk.  It will be even easier for attackers to take advantage of cell phones because we will have an even greater range of connection.  Therefore, we must take the steps necessary to protect the most valuable thing that we currently own, our personal information.  




References
Anderson, M., & Jiang, J. (2018, November 30). Teens, Social Media & Technology 2018. Retrieved from 
	https://www.pewinternet.org/2018/05/31/teens-social-media-technology-2018/
Anderson, O. (2017, December). Technology Use and Attitudes among Mid-Life and Older ... Retrieved 
from https://www.aarp.org/content/dam/aarp/research/surveys_statistics/technology/info-2018/atom-nov-2017-tech-module.doi.10.26419/res.00210.001.pdf
Athow, D. (2017, November 14). You need a VPN when accessing public Wi-Fi. Here's why. Retrieved 
	from https://www.techradar.com/news/public-wi-fi-and-why-you-need-a-vpn	
Demographics of Mobile Device Ownership and Adoption in the United States. (2019, June 12). 
Retrieved from https://www.pewinternet.org/fact-sheet/mobile/
Fitzpatrick, J. (2016, January 22). Your Passwords Are Terrible, and It's Time to Do Something About It. 
Retrieved from https://www.howtogeek.com/239771/your-passwords-are-terrible-and-its-time-to-do-something-about-it/
Grossman, D. (2019, June 13). The One Way Apollo Computers Still Beat the iPhone. Retrieved from 
https://www.popularmechanics.com/space/moon-mars/a25655/nasa-computer-iphone-comparison/	
Hoffman, C. (2018, May 09). How to Create a Strong Password (and Remember It). Retrieved from 
	https://www.howtogeek.com/195430/how-to-create-a-strong-password-and-remember-it/
N. (2017, May). Norton WiFi Risk Report: Report of Online Survey Results in 15 Global Market. Retrieved 
from https://www.symantec.com/content/dam/symantec/docs/reports/2017-norton-wifi-risk-report-global-results-summary-en.pdf	
Ruggiero, P., & Foote, J. (2011). Cyber Threats to Mobile Phones - us-cert.gov. Retrieved from 
	https://www.us-cert.gov/sites/default/files/publications/cyber_threats-to_mobile_phones.pdf



